
Learn to walk the dog. One of the most useful and effective lure techniques is called "walking the dog," because it resembles the type of wrist motion you might have while taking Rover for a stroll. For this technique, you'll use a surface lure with a weighted rear end.
Cast your lure and point the rod tip toward the water at a 45 degree angle. Move the rod tip downward to a 90 degree angle in a jerking motion. Reel up the slack in the line, then jerk the line again.
Move the rod slowly at first, and then gradually increase the speed to copy the movement of a bait fish swimming away.
Step 2 Use a lure to mimic the behavior of the bait fish.
2
Use a lure to mimic the behavior of the bait fish. Mimicry is one of the most advanced lure techniques for experienced fishermen to use. It's a subtle and sophisticated way of catching fish that requires the use of two pop lures or plugs for the best effect.
Tie one lure behind the other on a monofilament leader and cast your lure out deep. Move the tip of the rod in a twitching motion, varying the speed in multi-directions, attempting to mimic the behavior of live fish. Use your wrist to keep the line relatively taut, jerking the lure around and varying your movements.
Step 3 Learn to dead stick.
3
Learn to dead stick. Use a surface or topwater lure to imitate the behaviors of an injured or otherwise vulnerable bit of prey. If fish are hesitant, using this technique can get even cautious fish to start biting.
After you cast, leave the lure still in the water until the ripples go away, pausing and counting to 10 before you make a movement.
Move the rod tip, causing the lure to move in place very gently, then remain still for another brief period. Repeat brief movement of the rod tip, moving the lure in place. The movements should look erratic and sinking, but easy to catch.
Step 4 Learn to dive.
4
Learn to dive. Use a crank bait or a diving plug lure to learn to drop your lure deeper into the water if you want to get into the deep territory where the bigger fish usually remain.
Cast your lure and let it remain still while the line starts to sink. Do nothing for several seconds, then slowly start to work the lure beneath the surface by making short retrieval reels, then letting it sink back down.
Floating lures, like crank bait or diving plugs, require constant reeling so that they'll stay under the water. Otherwise, they may just float on the surface of the water.
Step 5 Learn to rip the surface.
5
Learn to rip the surface. Use a surface lure to skip your lure across the surface to mimic the behavior of a flying insect or some other kind of prey. This can be especially useful in catching sunfish or other shallow-water freshwater fish.
After casting, keep your line still until the ripples in the water go away, then sweep your rod down to the surface of the water. Use the sweeping motion either slowly or quickly depending on the assertiveness of the fish.
Step 6 Try trolling.
6
Try trolling. Nothing could be easier on a lazy fishing day than trolling behind your boat with a spoon, plug or spinner lure. It's also extremely effective, mimicking the behavior of a traveling bait fish, minding its own business and covering a great amount of ground.
All you've got to do to troll a lure is cast behind a moving boat and wind the line in slowly as you move. Generally, you'll want to use the trolling motor and go extremely slowly.
Another way to do is to let the lure sink down to the desired depth. Don't reel in the line as the boat drives forward. This will keep it at the right depth.